hiya if you are new here my name is
elizabeth i'm a medical student and an
artist living in london
and today i am going to do the full
walkthrough
of my notion set up for my second brain
i already have a full video on why a
second brain is absolutely life-changing
so all of that you can watch to your
heart's content if you so desire but
here
i'm going to give you the full
step-by-step setup the reason that i
have a second brain is number one
because i am a massive nerd and i find
things like this incredibly fun
number two is because it helps me make
connections on things that i would not
have necessarily done
without it and whenever i have to work
on a project or
write things i already have a pre-set up
library of
my own thoughts which is perfect and
timeless and does not fade the way
that my natural memory does so if this
sounds like a cup of tea
this is how i've set my own one in
notion the first step
is capture i have had some variation of
a second brain for over
a decade now so it comes very naturally
to me when i am consuming things like
books or articles or podcasts
to kind of think in the back of my mind
what do i not want to forget here
what do i want to store having this sort
of mindset when you are
kind of mining for information in the
world that you will find
valuable is incredibly important to
start with
the first thing i will do with my
capture is put them in a drafts page
so let's create a new page on notion
and let's call it drafts too sorry i
have one before
so let's do that and i use a board and
the reason that i use a board is first
in my first one
i will have let's say pre-processed
but you can call this whatever you want
and
the second one i will call sources the
next one i will call
studies the next one
i will call anecdotes
and the next one i will call
hmm images
and yeah i think that is good so
let's say i have a piece of information
from a book that i want to capture if
you are completely new to this
note-taking idea capture second brain
thing and are wondering
well what is worth going into my second
brain what should i take notes of i've
never done this before
my recommendation would be to capture
what surprises you
if you find something surprising it's
probably because it is new information
it is shocking or it is resonating with
something you are already interested in
so it's
unlikely that you will be wrong keeping
something like this in your second brain
however whichever way you do this is
absolutely fine it will start to come
naturally to you as you build your
second brain which is important enough
to put in there
and not put in there so it feels like
second nature so let's say that this is
an extract that i took for from a book
that i found interesting
it's from cal newport's deep work the
first thing i'm going to do with this
note sorry
it is just a personal thing but i
like to convert it to
a quote just because it looks bigger
i will always have the resource at the
bottom so it's from cal newport's deep
workbook
and i will always highlight the main
parts of the note especially if it's
more than five words
so here we have
demonstrate poor performance on the next
task so i will just highlight that
so step one is to input import the note
itself and to highlight the main parts
of the note
step two is to make sure that i have the
resources in this note here
step three is to write what this note
means to me
to me there is little purpose in
capturing random things
if i don't know why they're there so for
example
for this note the message to me is don't
switch between tasks if they are simple
straightforward ones
just get them done it's
worse to move on to a new
task and back this is my message
in the title i will put the word
attention residue
so now i have created a note the status
is pre-processed
i here have the i have the note from the
book itself
i have the resource i have what this
note means to me
and i have the title of the note so
every time i can see attention residue
i see everything that is in here usually
what i will do is just read my own
notes and i'll only use the resource if
i need to
mention it somewhere else now that this
is finished it can go into my sources
now i'll take you into what this looks
like
once it's been filled in so here i have
my unprocessed notes
these are basically notes where i'm just
even though i've done the work
i'm not sure in what category they fit
in in my second brain
so i've just let them simmer here for a
while these are
my sources which i have 573 of them
and they are all part of my second brain
already they have been put in there i'll
show that process later
um here i have the studies which i keep
separately
so again processed in the same way and
here i have medical studies which
are kind of different because they are
not always relevant to the things i talk
about in my second brain
then i have my rules articles things
that i've learned from courses and
literature i love so now that this is
kind of my
inbox and first step of my second brain
honestly you can leave it just as this
because this way you've captured
everything that you found interesting
but if you do things this way i think
they will just sit there forever
so i could technically search for things
in my second brain
but i don't think it would be very
effective and there's no connections
and yeah this would just be i think
extra work for no real reason
now this is where the magic comes in for
me
the next part is the second brain itself
and to create this
all i've done is created a second page
called let's call this the slip box
i've used a table so in this table what
you can do is add a property
which for me is a relation and i will
relate this to
my drafts to database
and if i've connected them now for
example
if here i have so let's say
in this part of my second brain i want
to talk about
productivity and here i want to talk
about
getting tasks done effectively
what i can do is go to my property and i
can find
attention residue so i can link a
retention residue here i will call this
my source one
and every time that i go to tasks being
done effectively
i can see that attention residue is part
of that
now this is basically the principle of
what i do
on a much much larger scale it looks
something like this
again this has evolved over time so i
here have put
all the main topics all the main topics
that i am interested in my life
which are life itself life design
getting to know oneself mental
frameworks
emotions people success
productivity that's a big one
creativity also a big one money branding
communication learning time storytelling
science
writing medicine also a large one
reading for fun and politics
so these are the main topics that i'm
interested in now
one thing i feel passionately about in
the second brain is not leaving things
just as topics it's better to have
sub-topics within each one of them
and a very cheap sub-topic is minimalism
for example
because i can check anything here
but a better sub-topic would be the best
way to never get anything done
or all you need is self-acceptance and
harmony these are specific concepts
i would recommend the more specific that
you get with these concepts
the better because in this way your
second brain becomes a lot more valuable
so addiction again is a bad topic
because it's too broad
but for example the pointlessness of
social responsibility is a very specific
topic
so you can add a lot of things to that
you will see that i've made primary
sources secondary sources tertiary
sources
studies anecdotes rules and art and i'll
explain what every one of these is
a primary source is something that is
directly related
to the topic itself it's a very strong
supportive point
so for example in designing your life
the scarcest resource
in is interest or you only live life
once
or being self-reliant in harmony with
society
are topics that are extremely relevant
to designing your life my secondary
sources will be things that are relevant
but not exactly directly targeted at
this topic this is something
that i think could be spun in a way that
it has a connection
and my tertiary sources will be things
that will directly contradict
my main point or will be so
far off that they are barely relevant to
it but i'm making a connection
then i have studies which sit in their
own category so for example
if someone asks me what are some studies
about getting to know yourself
i probably will have a few studies that
will be relevant to it already
and i don't need to go and search for
them in the tens of tens
of things that i have put in my primary
source
then i have anecdotes which are
basically cute stories so these will
also have a category of their own
because they lie separately
and rules so the 80 20 rule the 90
rule um these will stand also separately
then i'll have art
so sometimes if i see like getting to
know yourself if there's some relevant
art that i find
online which is quite inspiring i will
try to get a resource
i don't have a resource for this but and
i will put it there because if i need to
talk about it i might
link the art to it too so what my
workflow looks like specifically
is that when i take notes from a book i
will finish reading the book
and then i will take every single
sentence or
paragraph that i've highlighted and
create a different source for it
then i'll connect the source to its
relevant concepts and
very importantly one source will go to
many many different concepts this is
where
this becomes supercharged this node for
example is connected to six different
sources
it can be connected to a lot more and
the more of them you connect with one
another
the more beautiful concepts you have so
recently for example
i've started my youtube channel which is
something completely new to me because i
was basically not active on the internet
at all
so it was quite important for me to do
some research on what it feels like to
be a creator or how to
effectively deal with being online so
here for example i have a channel on
issues with social media which is
something i very much considered before
i started
and here we have something on thinking
your work is terribly important
for example this is taken from something
that had absolutely no connection to
social media at
all because at this time i was thinking
about this i then attached it to the
social media
so whenever i discuss it for example or
think about it or i'm facing issues i
can just go to this tab there are lots
of things that i can easily access
so the concept of not taking yourself
seriously when creating content
is very very liberating because as
bertrand russell said
one of the symptoms of approaching a
nervous breakdown is the belief that
one's work is terribly important
the only connection i make to the slit
box is that in these cards i will
name and number them so for example if
number two of his life
design to a will be designing your life
and two a1 we'll be living like the
ancient greeks a subset of which is
that's a straightforward life is
depressing
so i will kind of connect concepts
continuously to one another
every time i have a new concept that
branches off i will just put it
underneath the other
name it according to its number code and
also what the concept is itself
and then add its cards and its sources
to it this is a very easy way to grow
your second brain over time
to start with you might just start with
topics themselves so like life and
history and geography and things that
you personally
find interesting but as soon as you come
up with
a theme branch that into a theme and as
soon as you get an interesting concept
within that theme
i would recommend putting that concept
as its own separate category because the
sooner you break into categories
the sooner every time that you want to
put a draft in
you can think oh this would fit here and
there so every time i create a note
i will go all the way to my second brain
and look through every single one
on my list and think oh this is slightly
relevant so this could be a secondary
source on something it could be a
tertiary source on
something it could be a primary source
and something else and this is how
i keep populating my second brain with
very interesting connections to me
that were not there previously my
opinions on using notion for this is
that it works
so so well however i never use notion on
my phone it is simply too slow this is a
process that i do only once i am done
reading an article or listening to a
podcast or reading a book
i don't do it continuously throughout
the book however
when i am making notes on a book i am
already doing my
own thoughts on every single note that i
take
the time investment on a good single
book to me is
a lot so even though i might be able to
read a book in a few hours
it will take me twice as much time to
process the notes on it
into my second brain i honestly find
this so so useful because it means that
every single book that i read
i analyze so much and i spent a lot of
time
kind of connecting to previous things
that i know and previous things that i
found and
really thinking is this relevant to my
life or how could this enhance my life
and
what do i think the author meant with
this and how is it relevant to me
so it really i think enhances my
experience of reading in general so it's
definitely worth it so yeah this is the
first time that i tried to do an
expiratory video
and it was so difficult i'm not sure
that anything made sense but i will try
a lot to edit it in a way that it does
please
please please i would love any sort of
advice or tips on how i can make these
sort of videos better
but i do hope that this answered your
questions if you had any on how i set up
my
second brain any tips again on this are
so appreciated it takes so much time out
of my life so anything that could make
it quicker
or more effective would be absolutely
great
as always thank you so much for spending
this time with me i hope you have a
wonderful rest of your day be kind to
yourself and others and don't believe
everything you think
thanks bye